Shivaji , also spelled  Śivaji , (born February 19, 1630, or April 1627, 
Shivner,  Poona  [now Pune], India —died April 3, 1680, Rajgarh), founder of 
the Maratha kingdom of  India . The kingdom’s security was based on 
religious  toleration  and on the functional  integration  of the Brahmans, Marathas, 
and Prabhus. Early life and exploits  
Shivaji was descended from a line of prominent nobles. India at that time was under 
Muslim rule: the  Mughals  in the north and the Muslim sultans of  Bijapur and 
Golconda in the south. Shivaji, whose ancestral 
estates were situated in the  Deccan , in the realm of the Bijapur sultans, found the 
Muslim oppression and religious persecution of the Hindus so intolerable that, by 
the time he was 16, he convinced himself that he was the divinely appointed 
instrument of the cause of Hindu freedom —a conviction  that was to sustain him 
throughout his life. Collecting a band of followers, he began about 1655 to seize the 
weaker  Bijapur  outposts. When the sultan of Bijapur in 1659 sent an army of 20,000 under  Afẕal Khan to 
defeat him, Shivaji, pretending to be intimidated, enticed the force deep into difficult 
mountain terrain and then killed Af ẕal Khan at a meeting to which he had lured him 
by sub missive appeals. Meanwhile, handpicked troops that had been previously 
positioned swooped down on the unwary Bijapur army and routed it. Overnight, 
Shivaji had become a  formidable  warlord, possessing the horses, the guns, and the 
ammunition of the Bijapur army. Alarmed by Shivaji’s rising strength, the Mughal emperor  Aurangzeb  ordered his 
viceroy of the south to march against him. Shivaji countered by carrying out a daring 
midnight raid right within the viceroy’s encampment, in which the viceroy lost the 
fingers of one hand and his son was killed. Discomfited by this reverse, t he viceroy 
withdrew his force. Shivaji, as though to provoke the Mughals further, attacked the 
rich coastal town of  Surat  and took immense booty. Aurangzeb could hardly ignore so  flaunting  a challenge and sent out his most 
prominent general,  Mirza Raja Jai Singh, at the head of an army said to number 
some 100,000 men. The pressure that was exerted by this vast force, combined with 
the drive and tenacity of Jai Singh, soon compelled Shivaji to sue for peace and to 
undertake that he and his son would attend Aurangzeb’s court at  Agra  in order to be 
formally accepted as Mughal vassals. In Agra, hundreds of miles from their 
homeland, Shivaji and his son were placed under  house arrest , where they lived 
under the threat of execution. Escape from Agra  
Undaunted, Shivaji feigned illness and, as a form of penance, began to send out 
enormous baskets filled with sweets to be distributed among the poor. On August 17, 
1666, he and his son had themselves carried past their guards in these baskets. His 
escape, possibly the most thrilling episode in a life filled with high drama, was to 
change the course of Indian history. He collected tribute from Mughal regions and plundered their 
rich cities; he reorganized the army and instituted reforms for the welfare of his 
subjects. Taking a lesson from the Portuguese and English traders who had already 
gained toeholds in India, he  began the building of a naval force; he was the first 
Indian ruler of his time to use his  sea power  for trade as well as for defense. Almost as though prodded by Shivaji’s meteoric rise, Aurangzeb intensified his 
persecution of Hindus; he imposed a  poll tax  on them, connived at forcible 
conversions, and demolished temples, erecting mosques in their places. Independent sovereign  
In the summer of 1674, Shivaji had himself enthroned with great fanfare as an 
independent  sovereign . Yet even though both Christians and 
Muslims often imposed their creeds on the populace by force, he respected the beliefs 
and protected the places of worship of both  communities . After his  coronation , his most noteworthy campaign was in the south, during 
which he forged an alliance with the sultans and thereby blocked the grand design of 
the Mughals to spread their rule over the entire subcontinent. Shivaji had several wives and two sons. His last years were shadowed by 
the apostasy  of his elder son, who, at one stage, defected to the Mughals and was 
brought back only with the utmost difficulty. The man that British politician and author  Thomas Babington 
Macaulay  (later Baron Macaulay of Rothley) called “the Great Shivaji” died after an 
illness in April 1680, in the mountain stronghold of  Rajgarh , which he had made his 
capital. Shivaji breathed new life into a  moribund  race that for centuries had resigned itself 
to abject  serfdom and led them against Aurangzeb, a powerful Mughal ruler. Above 
all, in a place and age stained by religious savagery, he was one of few rulers who 
practiced true religious tolerance.